Section 5.5: Exam Strategies. Let's review the key
techniques you need for the IB exam.
In context problems. the inverse has real-world meaning. A company's
profit is P of n equals 40n minus 130.
Find P inverse of 1790. This means: how many
items must be sold to earn 1790 dollars profit?
Set 40n minus 130 equal to 1790. Add 130 to get
40n equals 1920. Divide by 40: n equals 48 items.
Company A charges 35n dollars. Company B charges 40n
minus 130 dollars. When is Company A cheaper?
Set up the inequality: 35n less than 40n minus 130. Subtract 40n
from both sides to get negative 5n less than negative 130.
Now here's the critical step everyone forgets: when you divide
by a negative number. you must FLIP the inequality sign!
So n is greater than 26. Company A is
cheaper when more than 26 items are sold.
Finding the range of a restricted function requires checking endpoints and
behaviour near asymptotes. Consider g of x equals 3 minus 12
over x plus 3 on the interval negative 9 to 9.
There's a vertical asymptote at x equals negative
3. The graph splits into two branches.
Evaluating the endpoints: g of negative 9 equals 5. and g of
9 equals 2. The horizontal asymptote is at y equals 3.
The range is y less than or equal to 2. or y greater than
or equal to 5. The values between 2 and 5 are never reached.
One more recap of the big trick. Solve g of
x equals g inverse of x for this function.
Use the trick: solve g of x equals x. So 2x plus ln of x
minus 2 equals x. Simplify to x plus ln of x minus 2 equals 0.
This can't be solved algebraically. so use your TI-84 calculator.
The answer is x equals 2.28 to 3 significant figures.
Mistake 1: forgetting to show your
substitution steps. Always show your working!
Mistake 2: not flipping the inequality
sign when dividing by a negative.
Mistake 3: writing f inverse as 1 over f.
Remember. it's the inverse function. not the reciprocal.
Mistake 4: missing domain restrictions
from roots. fractions. and logarithms.
Mistake 5: forgetting to draw
asymptotes when sketching rational functions.
Good luck on your IB exam! You've got this!